            Woodwind instrument design optimization based on
           impedance characteristics with geometric constraints
        Augustin Ernoult, Christophe Vergez, Samy Missoum, Philippe Guillemain,
                                               Michael Jousserand



      To cite this version:
     Augustin Ernoult, Christophe Vergez, Samy Missoum, Philippe Guillemain, Michael Jousserand. Woodwind
     instrument design optimization based on impedance characteristics with geometric constraints. 2020. ⟨hal-
     02479433v1⟩




                                        HAL Id: hal-02479433
                              https://hal.science/hal-02479433v1
                     Preprint submitted on 14 Feb 2020 (v1), last revised 30 Nov 2020 (v3)




    HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive             L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-        tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
search documents, whether they are published or not.       tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
The documents may come from teaching and research          des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-   français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
vate research centers.                                     privés.


                                              HAL Authorization
   Woodwind instrument design optimization based on
  impedance characteristics with geometric constraints

     Augustin Ernoulta,b,∗, Christophe Vergeza , Samy Missoumc , Philippe
                     Guillemaina , Michael Jousserandd
  a Aix Marseille Univ., CNRS, Centrale Marseille, LMA UMR 7031, Marseille, France
b Magique 3D team, Inria Bordeaux Sud Ouest, 200 avenue de la vieille tour, 33405 Talence

                                     Cedex, France
   c Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson,

                                  Arizona, 85721, USA
        d Buffet Crampon, 5 rue Maurice Berteaux, 78711 Mantes-La-Ville, France




Abstract
    Computational optimization algorithms coupled with acoustic models of
wind instruments provide instrument makers an opportunity to explore new
designs. Specifically, they give the possibility to automatically find geometries
exhibiting desired resonance characteristics. In this paper, the design optimiza-
tion of woodwind instruments with complex geometrical features (e.g., non-
cylindrical bore profile and side holes with various radii and chimney heights) is
investigated. Optimal geometric characteristics are searched to obtain specific
target frequencies or amplitude characteristics. However, woodwind instruments
exhibit complex input impedance whose features might change drastically for
a small variation of the geometry, thus hampering gradient-based optimiza-
tion. For this reason, this paper introduces new formulations of the impedance
characteristics (resonance frequencies and amplitudes). The approach is ap-
plied to an illustrative instrument subjected to geometric constraints similar
to the ones encountered by manufacturers (a key-less pentatonic clarinet with
two-registers). Three optimization problems are considered, demonstrating a
strategy to simultaneously adjust several impedance characteristics on all the
fingerings.
Keywords: Musical acoustics, Woodwind instruments, Bore profile
optimization, Impedance characteristics, Musical instrument design


1. Introduction

   Wind instrument makers typically rely on their empirical knowledge to im-
prove an existing instrument or to design a new model. For instance, their

  ∗ Corresponding author

   Email address: augustin.ernoult@inria.fr (Augustin Ernoult)



Preprint submitted to Journal of Sound and Vibration                   February 14, 2020
experience of existing instruments help them select suitable inner geometries of
the instrument. Once a new prototype has been manufactured, maybe with the
help of new tools (e.g., reamers, mandrels), the instrument can then be evaluated
by musicians. Modifications can then be carried out based on the manufacturers
experience to mitigate any potential problem. This procedure is repeated until
a satisfactory instrument, which is typically a compromise between different de-
sired features (e.g., tuning of all notes), is reached. This is an iterative process,
which often requires building many prototypes and is therefore costly and time
consuming. In addition, the empirical design and manufacturing process leads
to solutions and geometries that are close to existing ones. For this reason,
it is important to provide manufacturers and the musical acoustics community
strategies to facilitate and expand the design of new wind instruments.
     From a physical point of view, a wind instrument can be described as a
nonlinear sound source coupled with a resonator. The resonator is generally
reduced to its linear response represented by its input impedance defined in the
frequency domain as the ratio between the acoustic pressure and the volume
flow at the entrance of the instrument. The knowledge of the input impedance
and more particularly of its modal characteristics (frequencies, peak amplitudes
and quality-factors) allows one to explain and predict a large range of behaviors
exhibited by wind instruments [1]. Many well established solutions are available
to compute the input impedance from the geometry of the resonator with a good
accuracy for the majority of resonator geometries [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The in-
put impedance may therefore be useful to obtain resonance frequencies and peak
amplitudes of an instrument design without the need to build the corresponding
prototype. Such an approach was proposed by the platform PAFI [9, 10]. If
the target (desired) characteristics of the input impedance are known, it is also
possible to use optimization techniques to solve the inverse problem and itera-
tively converge towards an optimal resonator geometry with desired impedance
characteristics. The ability of optimization algorithms to find solution in a
large design space can lead to unexpected configurations, sometimes markedly
different from existing instruments.
     However, the design optimization of wind instruments can be hampered by
several challenges. Due to their nonlinear nature, wind instruments can exhibit
drastic changes in behaviors for small variations of their design parameters (e.g.,
leading to different regimes of oscillation). This high sensitivity of the acoustic
behavior can be accounted through a complete modeling of the instrument and
digital sound synthesis. Another difficulty stems from the dimensionality of the
optimization problem. For instance, in Tournemenne et al. [11], an optimiza-
tion was carried out based on a target playing frequency. The optimization
algorithm, which was tailored to tackle the complex dynamic behavior of the
self-oscillating system, was used with 10 variables at most. However, considering
complex bore and holes geometries would require many more design variables,
which is the main reason why most authors work on optimization methods based
on the input impedance only. Kausel [12] ran an optimization with 100 variables
on a brass instrument using a zero-order optimization approach. Gradient-based
optimization methods with analytical gradients were also used (Noreland [13])


                                         2
for the optimization of conical pipes with a up to 400 variables defining the
brass bore profile. Strategies to reduce the number of design variables can also
be found in the literature. For instance, Braden [14] used a parameterization
of the geometry of a brass bell through a few Bessel horns. The choice of the
impedance characteristics to optimize is also crucial in the optimization pro-
cess. For brass instrument, cost functions based on the tuning of the resonance
frequencies are convenient [13, 14]. This appears not sufficient for woodwind
instruments optimization which have a register hole [15]. In the latter case, the
magnitude of the peaks of the input impedance must be considered as well, as
proposed by Guilloteau [16]. It is therefore necessary to simultaneously adjust
different types of input impedance characteristics.
    This article deals with the optimization of some geometrical features of a
woodwind instrument, including holes positions and dimensions. Different ob-
jective functions are considered, relying exclusively on modal characteristics of
the input impedance for all fingerings. The instrument is modeled as a lattice of
branched tubes (holes). As a consequence, secondary resonances, cutoff frequen-
cies due to the holes [17], and input impedances of increased complexity can
occur. Specifically, an optimization based on a typical mode tracking procedure
would be hindered. This type of difficulty had not been identified in previous
papers on woodwind instruments design optimization [15, 18]. This may be due
to the focus which was put on the so-called logical clarinets, which have regular
geometries for which the shape of the input impedance is not challenging, at
least until high frequencies. To address the issue originating from the proposed
complex geometry, a new phase-based description of the resonances is used in
the optimization process. This new formulation enable the construction of cost
functions enforcing specific target resonance frequencies in addition to target
amplitude properties.
    The input impedance model is presented in Section 2. The proposed new for-
mulations of the resonance characteristics are explained in Section 3. Section 4
presents the general optimization problem formulation and the algorithm used.
Finally, the proposed approach is demonstrated on the design optimization of
an illustrative key-less pentatonic clarinet with two-registers in Section 5. Three
optimization problems are considered involving target resonance frequencies or
peak amplitude ratios as well as geometric constraints. A reference configuration
is obtained through an optimization of the clarinet based on a low-frequency
model. The influence of the initial design and the robustness of the algorithm
are discussed in Section 6

2. Input impedance model of a woodwind instrument
   Consider a generic woodwind instrument as depicted in Figure 1. The instru-
ment consists the assembly of Nelem elements which can be conical or cylindrical
segments with or without side holes. All these elements are described with four
geometric parameters (Fig. 1): the distance to the precedent element l(n), the
main pipe radius rpipe (n) and, if their is a hole, the hole radius rhole (n) and the
chimney height hhole (n). Note that in real-world instruments, the geometric


                                         3
properties of the elements (i.e., radii, chimney heights, and segments lengths)
must satisfy specific geometric constraints, which is an primal aspect of this
research.
                                        rhole(n-1)          rhole(n)
                          hhole(n-1)                                   hhole(n)
                                rpipe(n-1)                        rpipe(n)

                                 l(n-1)              l(n)               l(n+1)    x

Figure 1: Sketch of the resonator of a generic woodwind instrument defined as a chain of basic
elements (e.g., conical/cylindrical segments and holes)


   In order to characterize the acoustical properties an optimize the design of
the instrument, the input impedance Z is used:
                                             Atot Zrad + Btot
                                       Z=                                                 (1)
                                             Ctot Zrad + Dtot
where Zrad is the radiation impedance at the end of the pipe. Atot , Btot , Ctot , Dtot
are the coefficients of the transfer matrix Mtot between the input and the output
of the resonator. The total transfer matrix is computed by the transfer matrix
method as the product of Nelem elementary transfer matrices Mi [1]:
                                                     NY
                                                      elem

                                        Mtot =                  Mi .                      (2)
                                                       i=1

An element is defined as either a conical pipe or a side hole (T-joint). The
hole transfer matrices are based on a model proposed by Lefebvre et al. [19].
The model accounts for the presence of chimneys and implements various length
corrections. Thermoviscous losses in the chimneys are also considered to cor-
rectly estimate the magnitude of the resonances. This is especially true for a
long and thin chimney, which is generally the case for the register hole. The
model proposed in [19] also includes a frequency dependence for the internal
length correction. However this dependence is neglected as it does not signifi-
cantly affect the lower modes, which are the focus of this article, while markedly
increasing the computational time.
    The conical pipes (or cylinders) are modeled based on the formulation which
accounts for thermoviscous losses proposed by Hélie [6]. The cone transfer
matrix is                                           
                                      Acone Bcone
                          Mcone =                      ,                       (3)
                                      Ccone Dcone
where              
                   
                    Acone = rr12 cosh(ΓL) − (rr21−r 1)
                                                   ΓL sinh(ΓL)
                                 ρc
                   
                    B
                       cone = πr1 r2 sinh(ΓL)                  ,                          (4)
                   
                    Ccone  = (A  cone Dcone − 1)/Bcone
                   
                    D        r2               (r2 −r1 )
                       cone = r1 cosh(ΓL) + r2 ΓL sinh(ΓL)


                                                     4
where r1 and r2 (r2 ≥ r1 ) are the cone radii, L, the curvi-linear length (wall
length), ρ and c are the air density and the sound velocity respectively. The
complex wavenumber Γ which accounts visco-thermal losses, is defined as:

                  Γ = (jk)2 + 2εk 3/2
                  2
                              q               log(1 + r2r−r 1
                                                              )             (5)
                  ε     = ε∗ 1 − ( r2 −r
                                       L
                                          1 2
                                           )              1

                                                  r2 − r1
k is the wavenumber and ε∗ is a coefficient related to the temperature [6]. Note
that the ratio in the form log(1 + x)/x has a finite limit at x = 0 (i.e., r2 = r1 )
must be treated with special attention for elements transitioning from a cone to
a cylinder or conversely.
    In this work, the radiation impedance of both the main pipe and the side
holes are modeled by the unflanged pipe radiation impedance approximated by
a non-causal formulation (Silva et al. [20]):
                                                               
                                                1
               Zrad = −j tan kLrad (k, r) − j ln |Rrad (k, r)| ,                (6)
                                                2

where k is the wave number and Lrad (k, r) and Rrad (k, r) are rational fractions
depending on k and the radius r of the radiating opening.


3. Resonance characteristics

    This article aims to optimize a woodwind instrument based on the peak
frequencies and amplitudes of its input impedance. Specifically, resonance fre-
quencies should match specific target values. As for the peak amplitudes, the
proposed optimization enforces amplitude ratios between peaks. These require-
ments are obtained by the formulation of residuals related to resonances fre-
quencies or peak amplitude. These residuals, and this is an essential aspect
of this work, are constructed by taking into account the woodwind instrument
specificities to assure their continuity and smoothness in the design domain.

3.1. Resonance frequencies
    Resonance frequencies are generally estimated with a global modal analysis
[21] or a peak detection approach [15]. However, woodwind instrument tone-
holes, which can be seen as multiple parallel tubes, impose local and global
cutoff frequencies [17]. As a consequence, a small variation of the geometry can
lead to the appearance or disappearance of impedance peaks. The frequency
of the nth resonance can therefore jump from one value to another for a small
variation of the geometric parameters. Figure 2 provides an example of such a
problem for the second resonance.
    In the context of optimization, objective functions based on the tracking
of specific resonances can lead to non-smooth problems. Discontinuinuities ap-
pear for peak detection approaches based on the search of zero crossing of the
imaginary part of the impedance or of the derivative of the modulus.


                                         5
Figure 2: Example of peak detection issue (minimal prominence: 12 dB): a supplementary
peak is detected for a small variation of the geometry (∆x12 = 10−10 and ∆xi = 0 for i 6= 12).


a)                                                b)




Figure 3: The reflection function Rec (a) corresponding to the impedance of Fig. 2 and its
unwrapped phase (b).




    In order to mitigate the consequences of the non-smoothness due to tradi-
tional peak detection approach, a new approach is proposed in which the identi-
fication of the nth resonance frequency is not based on the explicit enumeration
of the peaks. Instead, resonances are identified based on the unwrapped phase
angle of the reflection function:
                                             Zin − Zc
                                     Rec =            ,                                   (7)
                                             Zin + Zc
which can be seen as the transfer function between incident and reflected waves
observed at the input of the resonator. If the resonator induces a time delay
between incident and reflected waves constant for all frequencies (a cylinder with
perfect radiation condition), the phase angle of this reflection function decreases
linearly with the frequency. For a real resonator the time delay can depend
slightly on the frequency but the phase angle of the reflection function stays
globally decreasing. Furthermore, by assuming that the resonance frequencies
are defined as the poles of the input impedance, they correspond frequencies at


                                              6
which the phase angle is a multiple of 2π (Fig.3.b). The frequency fn of the nth
resonance is therefore identified through:

                          angleuw (Rec (fn )) = −2π(n − 1),                            (8)

with angleuw (Rec ) the unwrapped angle of the reflection function. This defi-
nition allows the identification of the nth resonance without enumerating the
lower ones.
    Sometimes, due to the cutoff frequency, double resonance frequencies can
appear. Figure 2 shows a case where the second resonance is double: two fre-
quencies verify angleuw (Rec (fn )) = −2π. These double resonances correspond
to a loop on the complex representation of the reflection function which crosses
once more the real axis (Fig.3.a). It induces fluctuations on the decrease of the
angle (Fig.3.b). This double definition can be problematic if the aim is to deter-
mine an unique second resonance frequency. It is typically the case if the cost
functions of the optimization problem uses the residual between the estimated
resonance frequency fn and its target fn [15]: (fn − fn ) . However, in this
study, this difficulty is avoided by using an opposite approach taking advantage
on the resonance definition of Eq. 8. Here, only the phase at the target resonance
frequencies are observed. The cost functions quantify the deviation between the
unwrapped phase of the reflection function at these frequencies and their target
value. It is done through the residual: angleuw (Rec (fn )) + 2π(n − 1)

3.1.1. Computation of the unwrapped angle
    The definition of the reflection function assure its differentiability if Zin is
differentiable. But the traditional definition of the unwrapped angle induces
some irregularities due to a definition modulo 2π. The avoid this problem
another expression is used to compute the unwrapped angle. Starting from the
definition of the phase angle ϕ = arctan (=(Rec )/<(Rec )), its variation is:
                                                                   
               dϕ      1                d=(Rec )           d<(Rec )
                   =          <(R  ec )          − =(Rec )            .
               df    |Rec |2              df                 df
The unwrapped angle is obtained by integrating this expression from 0:

                              Zf                           Zf
                                   <(Rec ) d=(Rec )             =(Rec ) d<(Rec )
     angleuw (Rec (f ))   =                         df −                         df,
                                   |Rec |2   df                 |Rec |2   df
                               0                           0
                              Zf                           Zf
                                          d(sin(ϕ))                      d(cos(ϕ))
                          =        cos(ϕ)           df −        sin(ϕ)             df. (9)
                                              df                            df
                               0                           0

It can be seen as the surface covered in the complex plane by a function having
the same angle than Rec but a modulus equal to the unity for every frequencies.
This expression avoids discontinuities due to the definition modulo 2π of ϕ and
seems differentiable. However, a problem occurs when a loop corresponding to a
secondary resonances crosses the origin of the complex plane. If a small change


                                           7
of the geometry implies a new crossing of the origin, it will abruptly add −2π
to the higher frequencies. The value of this angle at one given frequency shows
therefore a discontinuity when a loop at lowest frequency crosses the origin. If
it occurs before a target frequency, it induces a discontinuity of the residual
obtained from Eq.(8). It is necessary to regularize this definition.
    The discontinuity comes from the angle definition Eq.(9). The reflection
coefficient being differentiable, its integration along the frequency axis is too.
For the reflection coefficient, when a loop crosses the origin, the irregularity of
the angle is compensated by the modulus which equals zero. The discontinuity of
the angle comes from the fact that the modulus is set to one for every frequency
in Equation (9). A way to regularize the angle is to restore a modulus R̃ which
equals zeros when the modulus of the reflection coefficient is zero and one when
is big enough:
                                                  
                                        |Rec | − TR
                 R̃ = 0.5 + 0.5 cos π                 if |Rec | ≤ TR
              
                                            TR                       ,         (10)
                 R̃ = 1                                   otherwise
              

with TR an arbitrary threshold. The regularized unwrapped angle φ is therefore
compute as

                                Zf                               Zf
                                              d(R̃sin(ϕ))                        d(R̃cos(ϕ))
angleuw (Rec ) (f ) ≈ φ(f ) =        R̃cos(ϕ)             df −        R̃sin(ϕ)               df.
                                                   df                                 df
                                0                                0
                                                                             (11)
If the loops of the reflection function are perfectly symmetric in the complex
plane, this definition does not affect the value of the unwrapped angle for other
frequencies whatever is the threshold TR . However, due to thermoviscous losses,
the loop are slightly asymmetric (Fig.3, a) and the regularization induces small
bias to estimated angle of higher frequency. The threshold TR must be cho-
sen small enough to limit this bias, but not too small to keep the researched
regularization. It is fixed here, after several test, at TR = 0.25.

3.2. Resonance amplitudes
   To evaluate the amplitude of the nth resonance it is first necessary to localize
the corresponding peak which can be done with the phase φ of the reflection
function. Even in the case where the impedance peak does not exactly cor-
respond to the impedance pole, the peak is assumed to be in the domain An
bounded as follows:

                       |φ(f ) − 2π(n − 1)| ≤ φ0 ,      ∀f ∈ An ,                           (12)
with φ0 ≤ π. This frequency domain is possibly discontinuous due to the
fluctuation of the unwrapped angle(Sec.3.1). The magnitude of the nth peak
is the maximum of the impedance modulus over this domain. However, the




                                             8
maximum is not a differentiable function. It is therefore replaced by the p-
norm:                                              1/p
                             X                    p
                     an =        (γn (f )|Z(f )|)                     (13)
                                  f ∈A
                                     fn

with p a positive number large enough to approach the maximal function but
not too large to keep the differentiability (hereafter p = 8), A
                                                               fn an extension of
the domain An and γn (f ) a ponderation function defined as:
                      |φ(f ) − 2π(n − 1)| ≤ φ1 ,    ∀f ∈ A
                                                         fn                  (14)
                                           
                                  φ(f )−φ
            γn (f ) = 21 1 + cos( φ1 −φ00 π) , if φ0 ≤ φ(f ) ≤ φ1
           
             γn (f ) = 1                        if φ(f ) ≤ φ0                (15)
           
             γn (f ) = 0                        if φ(f ) ≥ φ1
           

to avoid discontinuities due to numerical issues at the boundary of An . Here,
φ0 = π/4 and φ1 = 0.9π.

4. Optimization problem
4.1. General formulation
    When playing a woodwind instrument several fingerings are used. Each
fingering is associated with a specific input impedance computed by modifying
the transfer matrices of the closed tone holes (Sec. 2). In this study, for each
fingering, we consider adjusting the resonance frequencies as well as the ratio of
the magnitude of the corresponding peaks as part of the optimization process.
    Based on the discussion of Section 3.1, the nth resonance frequency of the
 th
i fingering is evaluated by the cost function
                                                       !2
                                     φ(fn,i )
                        Φn,i (x) =            + (n − 1) ,                    (16)
                                        2π

where fn,i is the target frequency of the nth resonance of the ith fingering.
   Similarly, to enforce the ratio between two peak amplitudes a2,i and a1,i ,
the residual Ai reads:
                                                     2
                                      a2,i /a1,i − ri
                           Ai (x) =                                           (17)
                                             ri
with ri the target ratio for the ith fingering. The general formulation of the
optimization problem we wish to solve is:
                            min P (x)                                        (18)
                              x
                             s.t.    hgeo (x) ≤ 0
                                     g(x) ≤ 0
                                     xmin ≤ x ≤ xmax


                                          9
where P and g are objective function and constraints involving a combination
of Φi and Ai . hgeo are geometric constraints related to the spatial positioning
and dimensions of the holes. The vector of design variables is scaled so that and
xmin = 0 and xmax = 1.

4.2. Numerical aspects
    The phase computation φ(f ) in Equation (11) requires a differentiation and
an integration. While the differentiation is computed through finite differences,
the integration is carried out through the rectangle rule. Both operations are
sensitive to the frequency step. A constant step of 1 Hz over the frequency
range appears to be a good compromise between accuracy and computational
time. For the cost function Φ it is necessary to evaluate the corresponding
phase at the prescribed target frequencies (Eq.16). To avoid an interpolation,
the target frequencies are added to the set of frequencies used for the impedance
computation.
    In this study, the optimizations are carried out using sequential quadratic
programming (SQP). This is a well-known gradient-based algorithm for non-
linear optimization problems ([22], Chap.18). It is implemented in MatLab
through the fmincon function. SQP solves a nonlinear optimization problem
through a succession of convex subproblem based on a quadratic approximation
of the objective function and a linearization of the constraints. The Hessian
is not exactly computed but it is approximated and iteratively updated using
the gradient and the function values of the objective function. As any gradient-
based method, SQP is a local optimization method and might converge to a lo-
cal minimum in the neighborhood of the initialization, which must therefore be
chosen carefully. At convergence, the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) optimality
conditions must be satisfied ([22], Chap.12). The KKT conditions are first-order
and are therefore only necessary conditions. In this study, the tolerance for the
first order optimality indicator is set to 10−6 while the tolerances on a relative
change of iterate and objective function are set to 10−10 and 10−6 respectively.
The gradients are estimated by centered finite differences with a step of 10−7 .
This value was found after a systematic numerical investigation and showed
to provide a good compromise between accuracy of the finite differences and
numerical noise.


5. Results for an illustrative instrument

    The instrument treated in this study is a fictive instrument including con-
straints which could correspond to ergonomic constraints for a real instruments.
The aim is to have a two-register clarinet-like instrument (a second register one
octave and a fifth higher than the first register) which can be played without
keypads and without forked-fingerings (logical instrument [15]) on a range sim-
ilar to a traditional clarinet (from D3 to G4 ] for the sounding pitch of a B[
clarinet). Following this short design specification, the first register range of
one octave and a half must be covered by, at most, nine tone holes (plus one


                                       10
register hole), which implies at most five notes per octave. The pentatonic is
therefore chosen: a C-major pentatonic scale from D for the first register, giving
a G-major pentatonic scale for the second register (Table 3). The range of this
instrument is similar to the one of a traditional B[ clarinet (D3 to A4 for the
first register).
    After having defined the design variables (Sec. 5.1) , the geometric con-
straints (Sec. 5.2) and the targeted impedance characteristics (Sec. 5.3), the
method used to obtain the initial geometry is described (Sec. 5.4). Three illus-
trative optimization problems are then presented on this pentatonic clarinet.
  1. the tuning of the first register only (Sec. 5.5)
  2. the tuning of the two registers (Sec. 5.6)
  3. the ratio of magnitudes of the first two resonance pics are optimized under
     the tuning constraints of the two registers (Sec. 5.7)

5.1. The design variables
    The geometry of this instrument must be composed of at least eleven ele-
ments: the entrance of the pipe (n = 1), one register hole (n = 2), eight tone
holes (n ∈ [3, 10]) and the final termination (n = 11). The main pipe radius at
the entrance is fixed to rpipe (1) = 7.45 mm which is the typical output radius
of a B[ clarinet mouthpiece.

               Elements           Type        Design variables
               n=1              entrance      0: all fixed
               n=2           register hole    4: rpipe , l, rhole , hhole
               n ∈ J3, 10K    tone holes      4: rpipe , l, rhole , hhole
               n = 11         final term.     2 : rpipe and l

                             Table 1: Geometry elements

   The design variables are (Fig. 1):
   • for each hole: the hole radius rpipe (n), the chimney height hhole (n), the
     distance to the precedent hole l(n), and the main pipe radius at the posi-
     tion of the hole rpipe (n)

   • the main pipe radius at the final termination rpipe (11) and its distance to
     the last hole l(11)
giving Nx = 38 variables of design summarized in Table 1.

5.2. Variable ranges and geometric constraints
   From a manufacturing point of view, there are three types of geometric
constraints. Some are physical: a side hole can’t be wider than the main pipe;
some are linked to the manufacturing process: if the main pipe is drilled with
a reamer, only monotonic conicity can be built; and some are ergonomic: if
the holes are blocked directly by the fingers, the hole radius and the distance


                                        11
between them are limited by the dimensions of the human hand. Mathematically
they are organized in this study according to three types: restricted authorized
range, linear equality between parameters and linear inequalities.

               Param.         Elements               Min.        Max.
                rpipe             ∀n                5 mm       15 mm
                hhole             ∀n                3 mm       20 mm
                rhole           n=2                 1 mm      7.5 mm
                rhole    n ∈ {3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9}     2 mm        6 mm
                rhole        n ∈ {6, 10}            2 mm        5 mm
                  l         n ∈ {2, 3, 11}          1 mm      150 mm
                  l      n ∈ {4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10}   10 mm       30 mm
                  l             n=7                10 mm      150 mm

                    Table 2: Boundaries of the variables of design

    The authorized range of the different variables are summarized in Table 2.
The range of the main pipe radius rpipe is chosen to prevent excessively steep
flares or strangles. The range of the hole radii are fixed to be smaller than the
dimension of the fingers (larger for the thumb (n = 2) and thinner for the little
fingers (n ∈ {6, 10}) ), but wide enough to avoid non-linear effects which could
be important in small holes. Excepting the thumb, the distance l(n) between
successive holes is imposed to be longer than 10mm and shorter than 30 mm for
fingerings of the same hand. The other distances can vary freely, which is why
a large upper bound (150 mm) was chosen. This bound is never reached across
all the optimizations presented in this work. The Nx = 38 design variables are
grouped in the normalized vector x, defined such that each component xi equals
0 when the variable reaches its lower boundary and 1 at its upper boundary.
    Linear relations between parameters are added to these boundaries. For each
hole, the hole radius must be smaller than the main pipe radius with a margin
of 1mm:
                 rhole (n) − rpipe (n) ≤ −1mm     for n ∈ J2, 10K.           (19)
The relation

          rhole (n − 1) + rhole (n) − l(n) ≤ −4mm           for n ∈ J4, 10K.   (20)

avoids the overlapping of tone-holes and assures that the tone holes are cov-
ered correctly, by guaranteeing a minimal distance of 4mm between tone holes
boundaries, excluding the register hole. In actual clarinets, the register hole
chimney sticks out into the main pipe. Therefore, the height of the register hole
is limited by the bore diameter:

                         hhole (2) − 2rpipe (2) ≤ −1mm,                        (21)

here again a margin of 1mm is imposed. Finally, due the conical sections, a
condition on the chimney height must be added to ensure that the top of the


                                         12
chimneys emerge from the main pipe. The following relations are imposed for
all the holes (n ∈ J2, 10K) (see Fig.1)
                     
                         hhole (n) ≥ rpipe (n − 1) − rpipe (n)
                                                               ,       (22)
                         hhole (n) ≥ rpipe (n + 1) − rpipe (n)

which imposes that the top of a chimney is more distant to the main axis
than the main pipe at the surrounding holes. Here, there is no manufacturing
constraints on the conicity. This can be justified by the use of an additive
manufacturing. In this study, to simplify the equations, all the linear relations
between the variables are grouped under the nomenclature hgeo (x) ≤ 0.

5.3. Target values
    The aim of this study is to present the process. For reasons of confidentiality,
the target value for the different acoustic characteristics are chosen arbitrarily.
The aim is not to build a real instrument which plays in tune, but to have a
resonator with the desired acoustic characteristics under geometric constraints.

   Fingering index i         1       2      3      4     5         6        7       8     9
        Notes               D3      E3     G3     A3     C4       D4       E4      G4    A4
   Tone holes open           0       1      2      3     4         5        6       7     8
     Register hole           •       •      •      •     •         •        •       •     •
       f1,i (Hz)            147     165 196 220 262               294      330     392   440
       f2,i (Hz)             /       /      /      /     /         /        /       /     /
           ri               0.5     0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5               0.5      0.5     0.5   0.5
                                       a) First register

 Fingering index i         10      11      12    13      14          15      16      17        18
      Notes               A4       B4     D5     E5      G5          A5      B5      D6        E6
 Tone holes open            0       1      2      3      4            5       6       7         8
   Register hole            ◦       ◦      ◦      ◦      ◦            ◦       ◦       ◦         ◦
     f1,i (Hz)              /       /      /      /      /            /       /       /         /
     f2,i (Hz)            440     494 587 659 784                   880     988     1175      1319
         ri                 2     1.89 1.74 1.63 1.47               1.37    1.26    1.11        1
                                      b) Second register
Table 3: Target scale of the pentatonic clarinet: first (Tab. 3 a) and second (Tab. 3 b) register,
with the number of tone holes open (register hole excluded), the opening of the register hole
(• : closed, ◦ : open), the target values for the two first resonance frequencies f1,i and f2,i
(/ : no target value) and for the ratio of their magnitude ri .


    For the fingerings of the first register (register hole closed), the target first
resonance frequencies f1,i are the frequencies of the equal temperament in ref-
erence to A4 = 440 Hz. For the fingerings of the second register (register hole
open), it is the value of the second resonance frequencies f2,i which are targeted
to the frequencies of the equal temperament and the first resonance frequencies


                                               13
are ignored. The aim of a register hole being to decrease the amplitude of the
first resonance peak, a third parameter is observed: the ratio of the magnitude
of the two first resonances a2 /a1 , as suggested by Guilloteau [18, 16]. The target
value of this ratio is fixed to ri = 0.5 on the first register (i ∈ [1, 9]), which is a
typical value for a cylinder. For the second register, the playing on the second
resonance, is facilitated if this ratio is above 1. Following the studies of Guil-
loteau [18, 16] a linear decrease of ri with the pitch is observed experimentally
for one register hole. The arbitrary choice of a ratio from 2 at the bottom of the
second register to 1 at its top is made. All these target values are summarized
in Table 3.

5.4. Low frequency approximation as a 1st-order design
    As proposed by Noreland [15], it is possible to estimate analytically a geome-
try by using the low frequency approximations to place the holes. This geometry
can be used to initialize the algorithms. In low frequency approximation, all the
elements can be approximated by inertance which can be interpreted as length
correction from the entrance cross-section (πrpipe (1)2 ) leading to an effective
position Pef f (n) of each hole including:

   • the effective length of the tone hole, including: the chimney height (hhole ),
     the matching volume, the “inner length” correction and the radiation
     length corrections [19],
   • the length correction due to the downstream part of the instrument [1,
     Chap.7.7.5.3, p.375]

   • the length correction induced by the volume added by the upstream closed
     chimneys [23].
For a given fingering, the effective position of the first open hole is fixed to the
quarter of the target wavelength. This procedure leads to an unexplained offset
of −20 cents for the final impedance. This offset is included into the target
position leading to: Pef f (n) = c/(4f1 × 2−20/1200 ), with c the sound velocity.
If possible, the register hole is positioned to the third of the mean of the tone
holes effective positions, with the longest chimney height and the thinner radius
with respect to their authorized values, which tends to maximize its acoustic
mass. To estimate analytically the geometry, only the distance l, the chimney
height hhole then the holes radii rhole are modified. The main pipe radii are let
to an arbitrary initial value, the entry radius: rpipe (n) = rpipe (1) = 7.45 mm
for all n. The boundaries constraints are taken into account: the position is
modified until it reaches a boundary, then the chimney height is modified and
finally the hole radius. If the three boundaries are reached without having the
desired effective position, the geometry is let with this defect. The modification
of both downstream and upstream hole modifying the effective position of the
hole, a loop is carried until the stagnation of the geometry.
    The geometry obtained for targets of Table 3.a under the constraints of
Sec. 5.2 is plotted in Figure 4.a. The corresponding tuning is represented on


                                          14
Figure 4: Comparison of geometries: (a) initial geometry (Sec. 5.4), the geometries obtained
after the optimization of: (b) the first resonance frequency F (Sec. 5.5); (c) the two registers
tuning F + H (Sec. 5.6); (d) the ratio of magnitude of the two first resonances A under the
constraint on the resonance frequencies (Sec. 5.7).




Figure 5.a. The deviation between the first resonance frequencies and the tar-
get frequencies is within ±10 cents except for the second fingering F ]3 . This
is because all the modifiable parameters of the last hole (n = 10) reach their
boundaries (the distance l(10), the chimney height hhole (10), and the hole radius
rhole (10)). Due to the constraints, it should not be surprising that the process
presented does not allow a satisfying tuning of the analytically designed geom-
etry. To improve this tuning it is necessary to use an optimization algorithm.

5.5. Problem formulation 1: first register tuning
    For this first optimization problem only the tuning of the first register (9
fingerings) is considered (Table 3.a). Following the discussion on the sections 3.1,
4.1 and on the definition 16, the cost function is defined as:
                                  i=9          i=9
                                                                     !2
                                1X           1X           φ(f1,i )
                        F (x) =       Φ1,i =                              .                (23)
                                9 i=1        9 i=1          2π

   In this problem only the geometric constraints (authorized ranges and lin-
ear relation between the variables, Sec. 5.2) are considered. The optimization
problem can be summarized as:

                                         min F (x)                                         (24)
                                          x
                                 subject to hgeo (x) ≤ 0
                                                0≤x≤1

    The cost function F depends only of the phase φ computed at the target
frequencies f1,i of the first register. Only the impedance of the 9 first fingerings
must be computed (Tab. 3.a). It is furthermore not necessary to compute the


                                              15
frequency response of the resonator at higher frequencies than the maximal
target f1,i . The highest interesting frequency being 440 Hz (Tab. 3.a), the
frequency range is fixed to [0.1, 480] Hz.




Figure 5: Deviation in cents of the first resonance frequencies from the target value for the
first register (9 first fingerings). The problem with F + H is presented in Sec.5.6, the threshold
ε1,i and the problem “A s.t. Gi ” are presented in Sec.5.7.



    The optimization algorithm is initialized with the geometry obtained by the
process presented in Sec. 5.4. The algorithm converges to a local minimum in
35 iterations computed in less than 1 minute on a standard personal computer
(4 cores, 16 Go of Ram). The cost function reaches F ≈ 10−9 corresponding
to deviations within 0.1 cents between the first resonance frequencies f1,i and
their target f1,i (Fig. 5)1 . The geometry obtained, represented in Figure 4.b, is
very closed to the initial geometry (Fig. 4.a). The design variables are modified
of less than 1.5% except for the last tone hole radius (rhole (10)) which varies of
about 6%.

5.6. Problem formulation 2: two registers tuning
    In this second optimization problem, the tuning of the second register is
included through the cost function
                              i=18          i=18
                                                                        !2
                            1 X           1 X             φ(f2,i )
                     H(x) =        Φ2,i =                          +1        ,              (25)
                            9 i=10        9 i=10            2π

which allows to adjust the second resonance frequency of the fingerings of the
second register (register hole open, Table 3.b) by following the discussion of
Section 3.1 and 4.1. The simplest way to adjust simultaneously the two registers

    1 The resonance frequencies f
                                  1,i are associated to the zero of the phase φ estimated trough
a linear interpolation around the zero-crossing.




                                               16
under the geometrical constraints is to treat the following optimization problem:

                                  min     (F (x) + H(x))                                 (26)
                                    x
                                  s. t. hgeo (x) ≤ 0
                                         0≤x≤1

This time, the highest interesting frequency being 1319 Hz (Tab. 3.b), the fre-
quency range is fixed to [0.1, 1450] Hz.

 a)                                            b)




Figure 6: Deviation in cents of the second resonance frequencies from the target value for the
9 highest fingerings. a) for the four geometries of Fig 4; b) a zoom within ±5 cents with the
geometries for which the second resonance frequency has been optimized. The threshold ε2,i
and the problem “A s.t. Gi ” are presented in Sec.5.7.



    The optimization algorithm initialized with the geometry from Section 5.4
converges in 451 iterations (about 1 hour on a personal computer). The compu-
tation time per iteration is longer that for the first problem (Sec. 5.5) because
frequency range used is wider and it is necessary to compute two times more
impedances per iteration (18 fingerings against 9 for the first problem). The
final cost values are F ≈ 10−11 and H ≈ 10−12 , which correspond to deviations
within 0.025 cents for the first register and 0.002 cents for the second one (Fig. 5,
Fig. 6).
    The geometry obtained is represented on Figure 4.c. Due to the addition
of the cost function H, the algorithm converges here to a geometry much more
different from the initialization than for the first problem (Fig. 4). However,
it is noticeable that this local minimum is better both for H and F than the
local optimum obtained in the first problem where only this cost function was
taken into account (Sec. 5.5): here F ≈ 10−11 against F ≈ 10−9 for the first
problem. This improvement is a consequence of the use of a local optimization
algorithm. The initialization used (Sec.5.4) is very close to a local minimum of
F , as illustrated by the similarity of the geometries (Fig.4.a and b). The addition
of H in the cost function leads the algorithm to another local minimum, more
different from the initialization, but better for F .




                                             17
5.7. Problem formulation 3: integration of the magnitude ratio
    As evoked by Guilloteau [16], to have a playable second register it is necessary
to adjust the relative magnitude of the two first peaks. Following the discussion
of the sections 3.2 and 4.1, the cost function
                          i=18         i=18             2
                        1 X          1 X a2,i /a1,i − ri
                A(x) =         Ai =                         ,                  (27)
                       18 i=1       18 i=1      ri

is adapted to treat this aspect. As in Section 5.6, a simple way to minimize
together F, H and A is to treat the following optimization problem:

                             min   (F (x) + H(x) + A(x))                       (28)
                              x
                             s. t. hgeo (x) ≤ 0
                                   0≤x≤1

However, the local minimum reached by starting from the initial geometry ob-
tained with the process described in Sec. 5.4 is not satisfying. At the final state,
the cost functions A and F are around 10−3 and H ≈ 10−4 , which corresponds
to a deviation higher than 100 cents for some fingerings of the first register and
40 cents for the second register. These deviations are too wide for a musical
instrument. In another hand, the ratios of magnitude are within ±10% of their
targets which is a good result whereas this aspect is not critical for musical
instrument. Tests from different initial results makes appears that it is impos-
sible to reach the target of the three cost function together. One possibility is
to impose a satisfying deviation between the resonance frequencies and their
target by converting the cost function F and H into non linear constraints.
    In this study it seems reasonable to fix, for each fingering i, a value of the
maximal deviation εn,i between the nth frequency resonance fn,i and the target
fn,i for which the tuning is acceptable. This threshold is defined as:
                                                         !
                                                  fn,i
                               εn,i ≥ 1200 log2              ,                 (29)
                                                  fn,i

by following the cents definition. A maximal deviation ε1,i = 2.5 cents is chosen
for the first register (i ∈ [1, 9]). For the second register, a wider deviation is
authorized: ε2,i = 5 cents for i ∈ [10, 18]. To convert the cost function F
and H into inequality constraints, it is necessary to compute the corresponding
authorized deviation ζn,i on the angle of the reflection coefficient φ at the target
frequency fn,i . By assuming that fn,i is closed to fn,i , it is possible to do a
Taylor development:
                                                          dφ
                  φ(fn,i )    = φ(fn,i ) + (fn,i − fn,i )    (f )              (30)
                                                          df n,i
                                                  fn,i      dφ
                  φ(fn,i )    = φ(fn,i ) − fn,i (      − 1) (fn,i )
                                                  fn,i      df

                                          18
The phase at the resonances being, by definition, φ(fn,i ) = −2π(n − 1). The
threshold ζn,i on the phase at the target frequency φ(fn,i ) is therefore defined
from Eq.29 by:
                                         1                         dφ
                  ζn,i = (1 − n) −         fn,i (2(εn,i /1200) − 1) (fn,i ).             (31)
                                        2π                         df
This threshold depends only on the target frequency considered and the deriva-
tive of the phase at this frequency. Numerically, this derivative is estimated
from a spline interpolation around φ(fn,i ). It is now possible to construct non-
linear functions which are negative only when the frequency deviation between
fn,i and fn,i is lower than the threshold:

                                    Φ1,i − (ζ1,i )2
                              
                                                       for i ∈ [1, 9]
                       Gi =                                                              (32)
                                    Φ2,i − (ζ2,i )2    for i ∈ [10, 18]

The third optimization problem is finally:

                             min A(x)                                                    (33)
                              x
                            s. t.     hgeo (x) ≤ 0
                                      0≤x≤1
                                      Gi ≤ 0          for i ∈ [1, 18]

To be sure to correctly estimate the magnitude of the second peaks, the fre-
quency range is extended to [0.1, 4000] Hz.




Figure 7: Ratio of magnitude of the two first frequencies resonance a2 /a1 for each fingering,
compared to the target values a .



    The optimization algorithm initialized with the geometry from Section 5.4
converges in 88 iterations (about 30 min on a personal computer). The non-
linear constraints Gi are well respected. The deviation between the first reso-
nance frequencies and their targets are within ±2.5 cents for the first register
(Fig. 5) and within ±5 cents for the second register (Fig. 6.b). The final cost


                                               19
value is A ≈ 2.6 · 10−2 . The corresponding deviations to the targets are within
20% for the most of the fingerings (Fig. 7) except for the lower part of the second
register where the deviation is around 30% (from B4 to G5). By comparison
with other geometries, the improvement is especially localized on the lower part
of the first register and the higher part of the second one (Fig. 7).
    The geometry obtained is represented on Figure 4.d. The geometry is really
different from the ones obtained before: its total length is shorter, it ends with a
convergent cone and the chimneys are globally shorter. A striking difference with
the geometry obtained by optimizing F + H (Fig. 4.c) is maybe the register hole
which is here nearby the entrance with a short chimney, whereas it was as close as
possible of the first tone hole with a long chimney in the previous geometry. The
importance of this register hole and especially its chimney height, on the ratio
of peak amplitudes was already identified by Noreland [15] and Guilloteau [16].
    The high residual deviation observed between the optimum obtained and the
targets illustrates well the necessary compromise, for this instrument, between
the frequencies of the second register (H) and the relative magnitudes of the
second peaks (A). This compromise is specific to the design problem discussed
here. It is not necessary present for every woodwind instruments design. It
could maybe be solved by relaxing some geometric constraints or by being less
ambitious on the targets ri for the ratio of magnitude (a ratio of 1.5 instead
of 2 for the lowest note of the second register is certainly sufficient). However
the aim of this last instance is also to illustrate the possibility to deal with an
acoustic compromise in an optimization problem.

6. Discussion: Influence of the initial geometry
    The gradient based algorithm performing local optimization, the starting
point can have a significant influence on the geometry obtained and on the
convergence of the algorithm. This dependency is assessed and discussed in this
section by repeating the three optimization problems 24, 26 and 33 from 19
other initial geometries. The design parameters values are taken randomly in
their authorized ranges (Table 2), leading to 20 realizations of each optimization
problem by including the ones already presented.
    For the first problem, where only F is minimized (Sec. 5.5), the optimization
process converges, in averages, in 75 iterations (around 2 min of computation).
The final cost function is always below 10−9 with an average value around
10−12 . All the optima are therefore satisfying from a musical tuning point
of view with a deviation between the resonance frequencies and their target
within 0.1 cents, far below the human perception threshold. The optimum
obtained from the initialization with low frequency approximation (Sec. 5.4)
has the highest final value (F ≈ 10−9 ). As discussed in Section 5.6, it suggests
that the local minimum the most similar to this logical initialization is not the
best solution.
    The obtained geometries cover a wide variety (Fig.8). It illustrates the fact
that, when only F is minimized it is an ill-posed optimization problem (several
solutions are possible). This property is necessary to let the possibility to make


                                        20
Figure 8: Boxplot representing the variability of the normalized geometric parameters of the
20 geometries obtained for the problem 1 (Equ. 24, Sec. 5.5). All the final cost values are
between 10−14 and 10−9 . For each parameter, the crosses are the median and 90% of the
data are within vertical bar. The gray squares correspond to the initial geometry obtained by
low frequency approximation (Sec. 5.4).




the cost function more complex or add other constraints such as in problems
2 and 3 (Sec.5.6 and 5.7). However, it is interesting to observe that among
this variability a global tendency appears. In particular the localization l of the
holes and their chimney heights hhole are similar to the ones of the low frequency
approximation (Fig.8), whereas the main difference is concentrated on the hole
radii rhole (Fig.8).
    For the problem 2 (F + H), the average number of iterations needed to reach
the minimum is 486, but this number shows a wide variety among the 20 repe-
titions (between 142 and 2900). The final cost function values show also a wide
diversity. Even if most of the optimization processes (15/20) have a good result
(F + H < 10−9 , corresponding to a deviation within 0.5 cents), 4 realizations
converge to a state at which F + H > 10−6 (deviation around 10 cents) and one
to F + H ≈ 10−3 for which the deviation between the resonance frequencies and
their targets reaches 500 cents on some fingerings. The geometric parameters
obtained for the two groups of optimums (F +H < 10−9 and F +H > 10−6 ) are
represented in Figure 9. Most geometric parameters are similar for all the ge-
ometries having a good optimum (F +H < 10−9 ), except for the final main pipe
radius rpipe (11) and the position of the three last elements trough the distance
l(9) which can compensate each other. The two groups of geometries differ es-
sentially by the hole radii rhole (3, 5, 6) and the chimney height hhole (8). These
two groups seem to correspond to two areas of the design space. Depending on
the initial state, the algorithm converges to one of these two types of geometries.
    For the problem 3 (A s.t. Gi , Sec.5.7), only four realizations of the opti-
mization process among the 20 converge correctly. The other ones reach the
maximum iteration (for 4 realizations) or stop because the step length in the
design space is smaller than the authorized threshold 10−16 (12 realizations).
The four converged processes reach the minimum after, in average, 180 iter-



                                             21
Figure 9: Boxplot representing the variability of the normalized geometric parameters of the
geometries obtained for the problem 2 (Equ. 26, Sec. 5.6). For each parameter, the crosses
are the median and 90% of the data are within vertical bar. The black data correspond to
the 15 geometries for which F + H < 10−9 and the gray data, the 5 geometries for which
F + H > 10−6 .




ations (around 45min of computation). Two geometries obtained are exactly
identical (including the one obtained from the geometry of Section 5.4) with
a final cost value A ≈ 2.6 · 10−2 and the other have final cost function values
around A ≈ 5 · 10−3 .
    The non-convergence of the 16 other realizations of the optimization process
can have several origins. First of all it can come from a local non-smoothness
of the cost function or an error in the estimation of its gradient. Even if, in
Section 3.2, the resonance amplitudes are defined by taking care of the differ-
entiability, their numerical transcription can induce some irregularities. The
numerical integration used to compute Equation (11) is sensitive to the fre-
quency step and can induce numerical error. Further investigation is needed to
improve this computation by using more accurate numerical integration tech-
niques. This aspect can have a direct incidence on the gradient estimation which
is here computed by finite difference. The knowledge of an explicit expression
of the gradients could avoid this difficulty, but also allow a better estimation of
the gradient, accelerate the computation and demonstrate the differentiability
of the cost functions. The formulation of such an expression is a complex task
which needs to be investigated in a further work.
    By observing the evolution of the cost function along the design space, an-
other difficulty appears. The representation of the cost function along the 38
dimensions of the design space being impossible, it is represented, in Figure 10,
on the plane where the 9 chimney heights hhole on one side, and the 10 main
pipe radii rpipe on the other side (Tab.1) are fixed equals and modified together.
The series of oblique valleys which appear are real difficulties for optimization
algorithm. The algorithm progresses slowly along one valley by jumping from
one side to another. The step can become smaller and smaller and even reach
the authorized threshold before a local minimum is reached. Preliminary obser-
vations suggest that the presence of these valleys is inherent in the use of peak


                                            22
                                                                 -0.2

                                                                 -0.4

                                                                 -0.6

                                                                 -0.8

                                                                 -1

                                                                 -1.2

                                                                 -1.4

                                                                 -1.6




Figure 10: Evolution of the cost function A in the plane of the design space where all the pipe
radii rpipe and all the chimney heights hhole are equal and move together, the other variables
being fixed to their initial values. Several parallel valleys are visible.




amplitudes. There is no specific study on the relation between the geometric
parameters and the resonance amplitude. Specific investigations are needed to
clarify this relation and eventually find a better way to include the resonance
amplitude in the optimization process. With the current definition used in this
study, the initial geometry must be chosen carefully to start the optimization
in the neighborhood of a local minimum.


7. Conclusion

    This article describes the design optimization of a woodwind instrument
with geometric constraints. In order to obtain specific impedance character-
istics (peak frequencies and peak amplitude ratios), new quantities are intro-
duced. Specifically, a new definition of the notion of resonance, based on an
ad-hoc unwrapping of the phase of the reflection coefficient is proposed. The
purpose is to facilitate gradient-based optimization, which would otherwise be
hampered by the non-smoothness of the functions. This is especially true for
woodwind instruments for which the presence of side hole makes more complex
the frequency response. The optimization is implemented, for high dimensional
problem, on an instrument with 38 variables thus demonstrating the potential
of optimization to deliver new designs.
    The design of a wind instrument rarely corresponds to the minimization of a
single type of quantity. For example, attempts to match resonance frequencies
of the optimal solution with target frequencies cannot lead, in general, to a sat-
isfactory musical instrument. Other characteristics might need to be taken into
account. Beyond the examples chosen in this article, the inharmonicity between
the first resonance frequencies for each fingering, or the radiation properties of
the instrument could be considered. To treat this aspect, we have shown that
it is convenient to formulate an optimization problem with a single objective
function to minimize (in our case the ratio between the amplitudes of the first


                                              23
two peaks of the input impedance), while including new constraints on the ex-
pected result (in our case the resonance frequencies of the first two peaks are
constrained around the target frequencies).
    For confidentiality reasons, the examples demonstrated in this paper, in
particular the choice of targets, are purely demonstrative. However, during our
collaboration with our industrial partner Buffet-Crampon, other optimization
results have led to the building of prototypes. The protocol for evaluating
these prototypes as well as their playability as judged by the musicians are
irrelevant in this article. What is worth noting, however, is that the approach
proposed allows, say in one day, to launch a design by optimization, to build
a prototype by 3D printing, and then to get feedback from musicians. Indeed,
since the definition of a good musical instrument is not explicit, and no one yet
knows how to translate it into an objective function to minimize, discussions
with musicians are essential to converge towards a final solution. Therefore the
design process remains iterative, as in the traditional trial-and-error approach of
the instrument makers. It is therefore essential to control the time required for
an iteration of “design optimization - manufacture of the prototype - evaluation
by musicians”. This is a strength of the proposed approach.


8. Acknowledgements

   This work has been partly supported by the french Agence Nationale de la
Recherche (ANR16-LCV2-0007-01 Liamfi project), in cooperation with Buffet-
Crampon.

 [1] A. Chaigne, J. Kergomard, Acoustics of Musical Instruments, Modern
     Acoustics and Signal Processing, Springer New York, New York, NY, 2016.

 [2] R. Caussé, J. Kergomard, X. Lurton, Input impedance of brass musical
     instruments—Comparison between experiment and numerical models, The
     Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 75 (1) (1984) 241–254. doi:
     10.1121/1.390402.
 [3] D. H. Keefe, Acoustical wave propagation in cylindrical ducts: Trans-
     mission line parameter approximations for isothermal and nonisothermal
     boundary conditions, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
     75 (1) (1984) 58–62. doi:10.1121/1.390300.
 [4] A. Lefebvre, Computational acoustic methods for the design of woodwind
     instruments, Ph.D. thesis, McGill University (2010).

 [5] P. Eveno, J.-P. Dalmont, R. Caussé, J. Gilbert, Wave Propagation and
     Radiation in a Horn: Comparisons Between Models and Measurements,
     Acta Acustica united with Acustica 98 (1) (2012) 158–165. doi:10.3813/
     AAA.918501.




                                        24
 [6] T. Hélie, T. Hézard, R. Mignot, D. Matignon, One-Dimensional Acous-
     tic Models of Horns and Comparison with Measurements, Acta Acustica
     united with Acustica 99 (6) (2013) 960–974. doi:10.3813/AAA.918675.
 [7] J.-B. Doc, B. Lihoreau, S. Félix, V. Pagneux, Bremmer series for the mul-
     timodal sound propagation in inhomogeneous waveguides, Wave Motion 67
     (2016) 55–67. doi:10.1016/j.wavemoti.2016.07.004.
 [8] R. Tournemenne, J. Chabassier, A comparison of a one-dimensional finite
     element method and the transfer matrix method for the computation of
     wind music instrument impedance, Acta Acustica united with Acustica 5
     (2019) 838.

 [9] ITEMM, Plateforme d’aide à la facture instrumentale, http://plateforme-
     lutherie.com/index.html.
     URL http://plateforme-lutherie.com/index.html
[10] P. Eveno, L’impédance d’entrée pour l’aide à la facture des instruments
     de musique à vent : mesures, modèles et lien avec les fréquences de jeu,
     phdthesis, Université Pierre et Marie Curie - Paris VI (Dec. 2012).
[11] R. Tournemenne, J.-F. Petiot, B. Talgorn, J. Gilbert, M. Kokkolaras,
     Sound simulation-based design optimization of brass wind instruments,
     The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 145 (6) (2019) 3795–
     3804. doi:10.1121/1.5111346.

[12] W. Kausel, Optimization of Brasswind Instruments and its Application in
     Bore Reconstruction, Journal of New Music Research 30 (1) (2001) 69–82.
     doi:10.1076/jnmr.30.1.69.7117.
[13] D. Noreland, Gradient based optimisation of brass instruments, in: Stock-
     holm Music Acoustics Conference, Stockholm \cite, 2003.
[14] A. C. P. Braden, M. J. Newton, D. M. Campbell, Trombone bore opti-
     mization based on input impedance targets, The Journal of the Acoustical
     Society of America 125 (4) (2009) 2404–2412. doi:10.1121/1.3087423.
[15] D. Noreland, J. Kergomard, F. Laloë, C. Vergez, P. Guillemain, A. Guil-
     loteau, The Logical Clarinet: Numerical Optimization of the Geometry of
     Woodwind Instruments, Acta Acustica united with Acustica 99 (4) (2013)
     615–628. doi:10.3813/AAA.918641.
[16] A. Guilloteau, P. Guillemain, J. Kergomard, M. Jousserand, On the Second
     Register’s Playability of the Clarinet: Towards a Multicriteria Approach,
     in: International Symposium on Musical Acoustics, Montreal, 2017, p. 1.
[17] E. Moers, J. Kergomard, On the Cutoff Frequency of Clarinet-Like In-
     struments. Geometrical versus Acoustical Regularity, Acta Acustica united
     with Acustica 97 (6) (2011) 984–996. doi:10.3813/AAA.918480.


                                      25
[18] A. Guilloteau, Conception d’une clarinette logique, Ph.D. thesis, Aix-
     Marseille Université, Marseille, France (Sep. 2015).
[19] A. Lefebvre, G. P. Scavone, Characterization of woodwind instrument tone-
     holes with the finite element method, The Journal of the Acoustical Society
     of America 131 (4) (2012) 3153–3163.

[20] F. Silva, P. Guillemain, J. Kergomard, B. Mallaroni, A. N. Norris, Ap-
     proximation formulae for the acoustic radiation impedance of a cylin-
     drical pipe, Journal of Sound and Vibration 322 (1–2) (2009) 255–263.
     doi:10.1016/j.jsv.2008.11.008.

[21] P. A. Taillard, F. Silva, P. Guillemain, J. Kergomard, Modal analysis
     of the input impedance of wind instruments. Application to the sound
     synthesis of a clarinet, Applied Acoustics 141 (2018) 271–280. doi:
     10.1016/j.apacoust.2018.07.018.
[22] J. Nocedal, S. J. Wright, Numerical optimization, 2nd Edition, Springer se-
     ries in operations research, Springer, New York, 2006, oCLC: ocm68629100.
[23] V. Debut, J. Kergomard, F. Laloë, Analysis and optimisation of the tuning
     of the twelfths for a clarinet resonator, Applied Acoustics 66 (4) (2005)
     365–409. doi:10.1016/j.apacoust.2004.08.003.




                                      26
